---
title: Doing Religions Right in DCC
date: 2018-05-16T17:37:12-07:00
author: Ted Tschopp
description: 
excerpt: |
   Every role playing game that I have ever run into with the exception of Dogs in the Vineyard has done religions wrong in role playing games.  These are my notes on how to get DCC closer to a relgious system that works for a believer and a role player.   
layout: post
permalink: /2018/05/16/Doing-Religions-Right-in-DCC/
image: 	wp-content/uploads/2018/05/the-valar.jpg
image-credits: The Valar by Dan Hainsworth https://www.etsy.com/shop/dthains  
image-credits-title: The Valar
image-credits-artist: Dan Hainsworth
image-credits-URL: https://www.etsy.com/shop/dthains
categories:
  - Role Playing Games
  - DCC
  - Religion
  - Middle-earth
  - Draft
draft-status: notes
---

# Contents
{:.no_toc}

* Will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents" header
{:toc}


# Notes

Every role playing game that I have ever run into with the exception of Dogs in the Vineyard has done religions wrong in role playing games.  These are my notes on how to get DCC closer to a relgious system that works for a believer and a role player.   


# Religion in DCC

## Good vs. Evil or Order vs. Chaos
One of the first questions you need to address in choosing a religion is the question of good vs. evil or order vs. chaos.  In Dungeon Crawl Classic (DCC) the spectrum is order vs. chaos.  This is a very post-modern approach to classifying religions which is under 75 years old.  The more classical approach is good vs. evil when it comes to religious struggles.  DCC has a very large problem in choosing this pole to wrap its alignment and morality around that will be addressed in the section on Bonds, Oaths, and Religion.  We will start with the traditional  understanding of morality and move outward.

### Morality of good vs. evil
Morality is made of up five major spectrums and many minor spectrums.  Everyone puts a different emphasis on these domains and collectively a religion codifies their practices and beliefs around these major items.  There can be other items in these spectrums. 

#### Care is the Care: cherishing and protecting others; opposite of harm

Mammals have an unusually long period of development during which they are dependent upon their caretakers. Therefore, caretakers who were more sensitive to the needs and distress of their children were more likely to have children survive into adulthood. This sensitivity generalizes beyond our own children, and can be activated when we learn of other people’s children or even see artwork of animal babies that activate our urges to care and protect.  This can be linked to anger toward the perpetrator of the harm

#### Fairness or proportionality: rendering justice according to shared rules; opposite of cheating

All social animals interact with each other, and while there are debates as to whether any non-human animals have a sense of “fairness”, there is little debate that the sense of fairness can be found across human cultures emerges well before the age of five, and possibly before the age of one and is related to the evolutionary process of reciprocal altruism. People monitor the behavior and reputations of others; those linked to cheating become less attractive as partners for future interactions. 

#### Loyalty or ingroup: standing with your group, family, nation; opposite of betrayal

There are finite resources and coalitions compete for these resources. The coalitions that are most cohesive tend to prevail over less cohesive rival coalitions.  The intuitions generated by this foundation generalize to brand loyalty, political partisanship, and sports fandom today. When people show signs of being disloyal, they are labeled as traitors and may be ostracized from their groups, or even put to death (e.g., treason is an offense punishable by death in the US). When people are loyal group members, they are extolled as virtuous (e.g., as patriots).

#### Authority or respect: submitting to tradition and legitimate authority; opposite of subversion

This is the traditional model of Order vs. Chaos.  

Primates evolved for life in hierarchies. Non-human alpha males are generally more like bullies than like leaders. Human alphas can go either way, but there can be little doubt that the psychology of authority is essential for understanding human political behavior. Groups and companies that have clear lines of authority, in which the authority is respected and seen as legitimate, generally function better than leaderless or normless groups, or groups with autocratic and domineering leadership. People who do not respect authorities or traditions are often ostracized or punished for insubordination.

#### Sanctity or purity: abhorrence for disgusting things, foods, actions; opposite of degradation

Pathogens and parasites threaten survival, and organisms that avoid contact with these contaminants are more likely to survive than their counterparts. The adaptive pressure to make accurate judgments about disease risk is especially strong for a group-living species whose diet includes scavenging, as seems to have been the case for early humans. The uniquely human emotion of disgust seems well-tuned as a “guardian of the mouth” for a highly social and omnivorous species.   "Behavioral immune systems" shows that contamination concerns can be generalized to social practices including being fearful of dissimilar others (e.g., immigrants) and a rejection of people who do not live in accordance with the group’s sacred practices.

#### Minor spectrums.

##### Liberty
Liberty (opposite of oppression): coercion by a dominating power or person

##### Grace
equity/undeservingness (Meindl, Iyer, & Graham, 2017)

##### Honesty
honesty/lying (Hofmann et al., 2014; Iyer, 2010). 

## Religious Patrons

## Bonds, Oaths, and Religion

## Sin, Absolution, Devotion, and Discipleship

## Roles in Religion

### The Believer

### The Pastor

### The Paladin

### The Monk

### The Missionary

## Dieties as Warrior Patrons

## Dieties as Wizard Patrons

## Dieties as Thief Patrons

## Example - Tolkien's Valar

### Manwë

### Varda

### Ulmo

### Aulë

### Yavanna

### Námo

### Oromë

### Nienna

### Melkor

### Irmo

### Tulkas

### Estë

### Vairë

### Vána

### Nessa

## Example - DCC Dieties

### Gorhan

### Justicia
